---
title: "Automatic experimental design with expert in the loop"
collection: talks
type: "Keynote"
permalink: /talks/2026-06-29-aichemy
venue: "Manchester Workshop on Bayesian Experimental Design 2026 and AIChemy and Leverhulme Research Centre Conference 2026"
date: 2026-06-29
location: "Manchester and Liverpool, UK"
---

[Manchester Workshop on
Bayesian Experimental Design 2026](https://sites.google.com/view/bayesianexperimentaldesign/home)

[AIchemy and Leverhulme Research Centre Conference 2026](https://aichemy.ac.uk/event/aichemy-and-leverhulme-research-centre-conference-2026/)

[Linkedin post](https://www.linkedin.com/posts/samuel-kaski-27790_in-context-black-box-optimization-with-unreliable-activity-7477406610311696386-N2jf?utm_source=share&utm_medium=member_desktop&rcm=ACoAAAAC2nsBY_hOb34KTUQw-TLjFjpCnbperqg)

I gave two variants of the same talk, one in Bayesian Experimental
Design workshop at Manchester Centre for AI Fundamentals, June 24, and
AIchemy and Leverhulme Research Centre Conference, June 29. I spoke
about a set of our recent papers and was asked about the papers - so
here a brief summary with links to those main papers.

I spoke of two main topics: What to do with unknowns in the model, and
what do do with unknowns in the goal.

**Unknowns in the model**

Do Bayesian  inference on the  unknowns, and  measure new data  if you
can. Which  data to  measure: Use Bayesian  decision theory  to choose
measurement  actions,   or  other  decisions,  to   maximize  expected
utility. Bayesian optimization is an instance of this.

We have known for some time already how to automate all these
operations, but only in principle. In practice, the computations have
been much too heavy for interactive use in actual practical
experimental design tasks.

We have published a series of papers that transform this by
amortization, which is an "embarrassingly simple" idea of transferring
the on-line computation to off-line pre-computation. Essentially,
learn form a massive number of pre-computed simulated designs a
function that maps a context (experimental design history) to optimal
design. Details are not embarrassingly simple, though... This can be
generalized to multi-objective Bayesian optimization, even
dimension-agnostically, to preferential (pairwise) inputs, and even to
noisy or perturbed inputs from biased experts with partial
knowledge. Here links to the papers:

[ALINE: Joint Amortization for Bayesian Inference and Active Data Acquisition, NeurIPS 2024]( )  
[Amortized Probabilistic Conditioning for Optimization, Simulation and Inference, AISTATS 2025](https://proceedings.mlr.press/v258/chang25a.html)<br>  
[PABBO: Preferential Amortized Black-Box Optimization, ICLR 2025](https://proceedings.iclr.cc/paper_files/paper/2025/hash/881259965dacb9f42967aae84a157283-Abstract-Conference.html)<br>  
[In-Context Multi-Objective Optimization, ICLR 2026](https://openreview.net/forum?id=odmeUlWta8)<br>  
[In-Context Black-Box Optimization with Unreliable Feedback, arXiv](https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.06187)


**Unknowns in the goal**

Assume an expert in the loop, who is in charge of the experiments, and
has tacit knowledge about the goal. That is, even if they cannot write
down their precise utility function, they will be able to give
feedback on which candidate solutions are more promising. Now the AI
can choose to ask the expert for preferencial feedback, interleaved
with simulatied experiments and measuring new data.

[An early example in drug design:](https://link.springer.com/article/10.1186/s13321-022-00667-8)

Interpreting the input from the expert requires a model of the expert,
a "user model". It does not need to generate all human behaviour, but
needs to give a likelihood for responses given the expert's tacit
preferences on the goal. This we can get from the principle of
computational rationality. Again the computations would be too heavy
in practice - but again we can amortize.

